Peter Newby
The Wrongs of Almoona, or the African's Revenge (1788)

T H E

W R O N G S   OF   A L M O O N A,

O R   T H E

A F R I C A N 's   R E V E N G E.

A   N A R R A T I V E   P O E M,

F O U N D E D   O N   H I S T O R I C A L   F A C T S.

B Y   A   F R I E N D   T O   A L L   M A N K I N D.

Oh! most degrading of all ills that wait
On man, a mourner in best estate!
All other sorrows virtue may endure,
And find submission more than half a cure.
But slav'ry!—Virtue dreads it as her grave,
Patience itself is meanness in a slave.
Cowper.

PRICE THREE SHILLINGS AND SIX-PENCE.

L I V E R P O O L:
PRINTED BY H. HODGSON, POOL-LANE,
AND SOLD BY W. LOWNDES, FLEET-STREET, AND T. BOOKER, NEW-BOND-STREET, LONDON;
J. BINNS, LEEDS, AND N. BINNS, PRESTON.

 


T O

W I L L I A M   C O W P E R,   Esq;
AUTHOR OF THE TASK,
AND
OTHER BEAUTIFUL POEMS,

(AS A SMALL, BUT SINCERE TRIBUTE
OF RESPECT, DUE TO
TALENTS
THAT WOULD HAVE DISTINGUISHED
ANY WRITER
IN
ANY AGE;
AND AS A
GRATEFUL RETURN FOR THE PLEASURE RECEIVED
FROM THE PERUSAL OF HIS WORKS
REPLETE WITH
INSTRUCTIVE MORALITY,
ENERGETIC POETRY,
AMIABLE PHILANTHROPY,
AND
EXQUISITE AND NATURAL IMAGERY,
HOWEVER POOR AND INADEQUATE THE OFFERING MAY BE)
FROM THE SHADES OF OBSCURITY, THE
W R O N G S   O F   A L M O O N A
ARE HUMBLY INSCRIBED,
BY
HIS MOST RESPECTFUL
AND MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR.



P R E F A C E.

HAD the Author of the following Tale been aware of the many publications respecting Slaves and Slavery, that have been announced since it went to the press (which was some months since) he would not have had the presumption to have enlarged the list. Struck with the outlines of the story, he sat down to form it into a poem, solely to amuse himself and to cheer the lonely, winter nights of solitude, far sequester'd from the social conversation of friendship. During the progress of the work new ideas crowded on him, and being swelled into its present size, he thought it might, perhaps, be received with candor by the generous public.



vi.      P  R  E  F  A  C  E.

   This being a true statement, he hopes it may meet with every favour from the Critic, whose indulgence he blushes not to request, being but too sensible that its faults will be many. But what he is much more materially concern'd for, is, lest any one should imagine that he is a defender of the passion of Revenge. Should an idea of this kind be formed in the perusal, he solemnly assures the reader, there is no one who holds it in greater abhorrence than he does.—However greatly he may err as a Poet, he can yet sue and hope for pardon at the bench of candid and liberal Criticism; but to publish the errors of his heart, to gloss them to the utmost of his abilities, and then to plead forgiveness, is an insult of so black a die, that he trusts he can never be guilty of offering it to humanity.


P  R  E  F  A  C  E.      vii.

With regard to the present disputes respecting the Slave-Trade, not having the least concern in it, he cannot so far forget the sacred precept of Charity as to approve of it; nor does he think himself authorised to condemn those who are concerned in it; as they have long custom to plead in their excuse. With the silent admonitions of their consciences may its legality or illegality rest! Tho' 'tis a species of traffic not entirely unknown to him. At an early period of his life, he was, through necessity, and not through inclination, forced to go to sea for bread, and being totally ignorant of the world, unhappily, through persuasions, sailed to the Coast of Africa, where he lay five months, and from thence went to Jamaica; in which voyage he was an eye-witness of scenes that would have shocked even apathy itself, and made the sternest stoic weep.


viii.      P  R  E  F  A  C  E.

   But may the veil be undrawn! and may indulgence either cover the faults in the following pages, or touch them with a compassionate hand! The author deprecates the severity of condemnation, and leaves his performance to the lenity of a Jury of English Critics. Should they, reluctantly forced by the duty they owe to the public and themselves, bring in their verdict against a culprit-author, he rests assured they will, at least, temper it with their usual mercy, as he arrogates to himself little or no merit in the execution of the Poem, if it be worthy that title.
   He hopes every allowance will be made for the errors of the press, as he was upwards of thirty miles from it, and had not an opportunity of revising the corrected proofs.
   April, 1788.

 



A R G U M E N T.

IN the year 1655 the Island of Jamaica, at that time in the possession of the Spaniards, was attacked and taken by Admirals PENN and VENABLES, and Colonel D'OILEY. Among the number of slaves who joined the English, one was particularly distinguished, who is here called ALMOONA. Some time before the invasion of the island his master had forced his wife from him, of whom the unhappy African was distractedly doating: He had frequently, in the strongest and most pathetic manner, entreated his master to restore her to him, but in vain. On the arrival of the English he found an opportunity of seeing her; and after he had assured her that she was as dear to him as ever, he told her it was not possible for him to take her to his arms, but that he would assert the rights of a husband, and free her from her misery; upon which he immediately plunged a dagger into her breast. He then fled to the English, met his master in the field of battle, and slew him.—History informs us that he was declared free, and that he died in 1718, having ever bewailed his misfortunes in gloomy solitude.



T H E

W R O N G S   OF   A L M O O N A,

O R   T H E

A F R I C A N 's   R E V E N G E.

WIDE in the bay the white-cloth'd vessels spread,
And in proud triumph o'er its bosom shed
Their eastern shades. The English colours flew—
Each soldier ready, and elate each crew
Impatient waited for brave PENN'S command,
To man the boats, and on the Isle to land.
The tow'ring masts the distant hills beheld,
Where SLAV'RY groan'd in ev'ry sloping field:
Where the proud Spaniard exercis'd the goad,
And rul'd the wretched with an iron rod:
Where the poor African, from friendship torn,
The rage of cruelty too long had borne;
Too long beneath its daily scourge had bled,
With labour harass'd, and with hunger fed.


[ 2 ]

But now a change of fate approaches fast,
And the worn Slave shall be revenged at last.
   Pale, trembling Terror now the Isle assails,
Borne on the pinions of the English sails:
Her looks terrific strike a panic dread,
And ev'ry horror from her bosom's spread:
She leaves the ships, swiftly she cuts the air,
And thro' the Isle her flight conveys despair.
Exhaling wide her pestilential breath
She sounds the trumpet of approaching death.
From fort to fort, from place to place she flies,
And echo multiplies her dreadful cries.
Meantime the Chiefs, of nobler mould, convene,
And strive to change the wild, disorder'd scene.
Firm to their trust, to arms their orders beat,
And Soldiers line the entrance of each street.
New batt'ries, quick, they raise along the shore,
From whence, in vain, tremendous guns shall roar.
Impetuous as the tide each chosen band,
Thro' show'rs of balls, shall seize the wish'd-for strand,
This night's allow'd each method to devise
That may, ere Sol again illumes the skies,


[ 3 ]

Bid a defiance to the skill of war,
The guided Soldier, and th'impetuous Tar:
Both sons of Britain, eager for the fight,
And, with reluctance, yielding to the night.
Prepare ye then, your tortur'd Slaves compel,
To share you danger, and their Vict'ry swell.
Rest a few hours, if sleep can close your eyes—
To-morrow many a Spanish Hero dies.
   And now the Sun had dipp'd his hissing rays
Far on th'horizon of the western seas.
Now, from their daily toils, with aching limbs,
The Slaves retir'd and gave their ev'ning hymns
To their avenging Gods. Among the rest
Two wretched friends, who knew each other's breast,
Who knew the dangers of th'impending war,
And heard, in silence, tumults from afar,
Met, by agreement, in a lonely place,
To quit their bondage and to fly disgrace.
The clouds hung heavy on the dark'ning skies,
And screen'd their meeting from their tyrant's eyes.
With fond embraces each receiv'd his friend;
When thus Almoona strove his thoughts t'unbend.


[ 4 ]

   "Welcome my Zemka, welcome to my arms—
"Welcome as once were my Teeaina's charms.
"Does not thy soul, with noble ardour, beat
"To see the streamers of yon hostile fleet?
"Our tyrants now shall tyrannize no more,
"And vainly shall they our strong aid implore.
"Yes—May th'avenging Gods that wretch pursue,
"Whose grov'ling soul shall fight among their crew!
"Yes—perish he! whose hand shall strike one blow,
"Or stive to stop the progress of the foe!
"But surely none, from Afric's burning soil,
"Prefers a life of cruelty and toil
"To the bold hardy dangers of the field,
"Where death or conquest shall emboss his shield?
"No—let me not suspect my fellow Slaves—
"The man, who bravely falls, his honor saves.
"The deadliest wound gives but a moment's pain,
"And, when 'tis past, he will no more complain.
"Of what he daily feels let him but think,
"And from the toils of war not one will shrink.
"Were it not better, nobly, like a man, to die,
"Than cringe to tyranny, and meanly sigh?


[ 5 ]

"Were it not better every storm to brave,
"Than be the wretched thing we are—a SLAVE?
"What says my Zemka? speak thy very soul,
"That cannot brook thy master's vile control?
"Shall we to work?—But have we ought to chuse?
"No—'twould be worse than death the hour to lose.
   Almoona ceas'd: and Zemka thus reply'd.
"Ah! didst thou know how boils th'avenging tide
"In ev'ry vein, thou wouldst not Zemka ask,
"At what fix'd hour we must begin the talk.
"This moment let our brothers be conven'd,
"Who long, like us, of mis'ry have complain'd,
"Who long have felt whatever cruel pride
"Has dar'd t'inflict, of every feeling void.
"And what unbloody means has it forgot?
"The least of which the fairest page would blot,
"That holds to view our wretched, slavish days,
"Basely bereft of ev'ry glimpse of ease.
"And shall we still to this vile drudg'ry bend,
"Still to the lash our shoulders give, my friend?
"No—Freedom now th'horizon skirts with rays,
"That only wait our call to rise and blaze.


[ 6 ]

"Then, let us boldly bid its sun to shine,
"And in this gloom of toil no longer pine.
"Let the wild torch of discord flame around,
"And scatter horror o'er this hated ground!
"Let the detested Conch, that grates our ears,
"Fill our inhuman tyrants souls with fears!
"Let us divide, take each a different way—
"Our Gods have call'd, and shall we disobey?
"No—Let our souls, in one strong league combin'd
"Break from our bonds, and be no more confin'd!
"Let all be rous'd, and let this very hour
"Convince these villains we despise their pow'r.
"Let us aloud—
                     "Ah stop," Almoona cry'd,
"Let not our schemes by mortals be descry'd;
"Let us, for once, with silent, stealthy pace,
"Creep to the huts, where pines our wretched race.
"Let us inform them, if they do not know,
"That now's the time to strike a glorious blow;
"When our destested masters, struck with fear,
"See the grim giant-danger, stalking near.


[ 7 ]

"Let's bid them to beware their flatt'ring tongues,
"And feel their wounds, and their inhuman wrongs,
"When, to repulse the warriors of yon fleet,
"They'll meanly stoop assistance to entreat.
"But he, who'll lick his Driver's bloody hand—
"List not the dastard in our noble band.
"Let just revenge o'er ev'ry heart preside."—
   "Yes, that shall marshall us"—firm Zemka cry'd,
"And lead us quickly, to yon whiten'd beach,
"Beyond the lust of cruelty to reach.
"There, when the reeking weapon's point we turn
"Against our barb'rous lords, shall we not burn
"Strong and impetuous as the noon-tide rays,
"And in the midst of slaughter nobly blaze?
"Yes, yes, my friend, yon foreign host shall own
"That we're repay'd for ev'ry silent groan.
"Then arm, ye Africans, without delay;
"Revenge, revenge now lights the noble way!
"And, if, ye Gods! ye will vouchsafe to hear
"The long-tormented, injur'd Zemka's pray'r,
"Give me my tyrant, hand to hand, to meet!
"Give me to lay him prostrate at my feet!


[ 8 ]

"Grant me but this—I ask no other boon—
"Call when ye will, ye cannot call too soon!
"Come my Almoona, let our souls be tryd"—
   "In some few moments mine,"Almoona cry'd,
"Shall shew such rooted fortitude, as ne'er
"Shed dearer blood, or kiss'd a sweeter tear.
"Ah! Zemka, madness almost fires my brain—
"But 'tis no time to meditate on pain.
"No; be my thoughts on other objects hung,
"My soul is warm'd, and every nerve is strung.
"Thou talk'st of vengeance,—yet thou dost not feel
"Those injuries, that this rack'd bosom steel.
"Thou know'st not half so much, as wretched I—
"From thee no wife is torn, that once did lie
"Within thy arms, unspotted as a child,
"Beauteous in form, engaging, tender, mild.
"Thou know'st her well, and well thou knowest where
"My dear Teeaina sheds the scorching tear.
"From me did our curs'd ruler force this wife—
"And, by our Gods, he pays me with his life.
"And yet not he alone—


[ 9 ]

"Oh! my dear Zemka, I have plann'd a deed,
"At which e'en tyranny itself might bleed—
"But I'm resolv'd—my honor is too dear—
"Tho' sweet the kiss, in vain shall drop the tear."
   Almoona here, with agony oppress'd,
Lean'd, for a moment, on his Zemka's breast.
But, rousing ev'ry purport of his mind,
He thus explain'd the plan he had design'd.
   "Zemka, my friend, oh! pray thee, ask not why
"In this great hour Almoona's heard to sigh;
"Oh! ask me not, why thus my soul can stoop
"Beneath its heavy injuries to droop:
"Thou know'st it brought its vigour from a soil,
"Were none of mine were e'er disgrace'd with toil:
"Thou know'st 'tis proud, impatient of restraints,
"And yields not, long, to womanish complaints.
"Yet still (tho' thou this weakness may'st reprove)
"I can't forget the tenderness of love.
"Thou hear'st me, as thou ought'st to hear, complain
"And treatest me, I fear, with some disdain.
"But could'st thou read Almoona's tortur'd heart—
"And yet—enough—my Zemka, let us part.


[ 10 ]

"When this dread task is o'er, e'en thou shalt own,
"Whate'er an injur'd man could do, I've done.
"Yes, vengeance, come, lend thy terrific aid,
"And be my spoiler an example made,
"To teach these WHITES, who wallow in their gold,
"And in contempt their fellow-creatures hold,
"Not to despise those laws, that nature gave,
"Nor trample, without mercy, on the SLAVE.
"Oh! steel my arm, and doubly steel my heart,—
"I've much to do—from much I have to part.
"Come, freedom, come, and bring thy smiling train
"Of sweetest joys, that feel no stripes or pain.
"Let me, if I can serve my injur'd friends,
"Be thy devoted victim—nobly ends
"The life of man, if his last stream of blood
"Flows, freely, for an universal good.
"Come, dangers, come, ye cannot me affright:  }
"Be ye as horrid as the shriek of night,              }
"Almoona's courage will not shun your sight.    }
"Lead me thro' ev'ry arduous path you chuse,
"I fear no wounds, no perils I refuse:


[ 11 ]

"Place me among the embatled croud of foes,
"I hold a heart, that no despondence knows.
   "Now, Zemka, let us part, thou'lt take the east,
"And I, with diligence will range the west.
"Bid each brave African the moment seize,
"If he would wish his guardian Gods to please:
"Bid him to quit this vile, disgraceful state,
"And seek that freedom, which must now await
"The man of spirit, whose high soul disdains
"To bear the gall of vile, ignoble chains.
"Farewell—To-morrow with our friends we'll meet,
"And join the forces of yon welcome fleet.
"Or, should the Gods ordain that thus we part,
"Come, let me strain thee to my beating heart.
"If we survive, a future day shall tell
"What feats we did—once more, my friend, farewell."
   This said, they part, with brightest hopes elate,
While, tott'ring, hangs the balance of their fate.
The scale of injuries, revenge would sink,
But pity holds, awhile, the trembling link.
   Now from the shore is heard a buzzing din,
Where war's destructive ravages begin.


[ 12 ]

Now hostile guns the must'ring troops annoy,
And fire repeated vollies to destroy
Erecting ramparts. Now, the ships to burn,
In curving lines, the Spaniards, in return,
The dreadful bomb and carcass quickly throw,
Whose fatal bowels in the æther glow.
In ev'ry quarter messengers arrive,
Commanding all immediate help to give.
Wide spread the summons!—but they spread in vain,
For Zemka flies to seek the sons of pain.
He finds them ready to obey his call,
To conquer nobly, or like men to fall.
From hut to hut the wish of battle's spread;
Impatience starts from off its weary'd bed;
Extactic hopes of freedom smile around,
And all, in silence, quit the hated ground.
With nature's arms they march, in close array,
And only wish for the return of day.
   Meanwhile Almoona big with lab'ring thought,
Which in his breast a various conflict wrought,
Flew towards the house, where his Teeaina dwelt,
And the strong war of love and madness felt.

[ 13 ]

Yet, tho' his feelings almost sunk with woes,
His loftier soul was darted on his foes.
For his poor Fellow-Slaves he deeply felt,
On whom too many cruelties were dealt.
For them as much as for himself, he bled,
And calmly visited each hurdled shed.
Their hearts he rous'd from slumber and repose,
To thunder vengeance on their hated foes.
In crowds they follow his persuading voice,
And all, unanimously, make one choice.
   Near to the fatal place arriv'd, at length,
He works his bosom to its fullest strength,
But conscious of the race, from whence he sprang,
He stops his followers with this harangue.
   "The wish'd-for time, my Fellow-Slaves, is here,
"When we no longer need our tyrants fear;
"By whose commands our wounded backs, no more,
"Shall be distain'd with painful, fest'ring gore;
"When to the drudging hoe, at peep of day,
"We shall no more with whips be driv'n away.
"Yes, that bless'd hour, at last, our Gods bestow,
"Which frees us from the keen, inhuman blow.

[ 14 ]

"Nay to our pow'r our tort'rers too they give,
"And not one moment longer would they live,
"Were our revenge by meaner ways pursu'd.
"But heav'n forbid our hands should be imbru'd,
"In blood, thus vilely, at this hour of night,
"When nobler means await us in the fight!
"Yes, let me hope my friends these Whites will spare,
"Till in the dangers of the field we share.
"There be ye arm'd with vengeance and with might;
"Your deeds will shine, with lustre, in the light.
"There shall our prowess, in this noble cause,
"Meet with the gen'rous Briton's loud applause.
"But halt a moment—My Teeaina's here,
"I wish to give her one poor, parting tear.
"I'll not be long, believe me, honest friends—
"With patience wait—for soon your trouble ends,
"While mine—but this delay it cannot brook."
This said, with love and horror in his look,
With madd'ning swiftness from his friends he flew,
And from his breast the fatal dagger drew.
   Now o'er Alphonso's house a heavy cloud
Spread its large sheet, and FURY cry'd aloud

[ 15 ]

"This night, thou cruel ravisher, this night,
"Shall horror freeze thee with her bloody sight.
"I see her hov'ring with her ghastly train
"Of black despair,—of shrieks,—of deathly pain.
"Deaf to thy voice, she will not hear thy cries,
"From thee, this night, each lawless pleasure flies.
"Swift be ye gone, your blandishments forbear,
"As bubles break, and vanish into air.
"My turn is come, this hour to me belongs,
"And I am armed with Almoona's wrongs.
"Ah! hear'st thou not the swelling cry of war;
"Borne on the winds, and raging from afar?
"Rouse thee, Alphonso, from thy lull'd repose—
"For lo! where comes the keenest of thy foes.
"See where he stops—he wipes his sorrow'd face,
"Where tears of pity trickle down apace.
"But see with supplicating hands he kneels,
"And to the Gods he gives the pangs he feels.
"And hark! he speaks, tumultuous passions press,
"And their big agonies his soul distress.
   "Ye Gods, who long my injuries have known,
"Who've long beheld my tears, long heard my groans,

[ 16 ]

"Oh! help me in this dreadful hour, I pray,
"Whilst one foul blot from hence is wash'd away.
"Oh! nerve my arm—my soul with firmness steel!—
"And pity, if ye can, the throbs I feel.
"Oh! dear Teeaina, what must thou endure?
"But for our wrongs there is no other cure.
"And can it be?—can I resolve to shed
"The blood, that warms the partner of my bed?
"What do I say, oh! Gods!—my partner—no:
"This breast her lov'd embrace can never know.
"What? take her from the curs'd Alphonso's arms,
"Who long has rioted in all her charms?
"No; be I, then, the vilest wretch that crawls,
"And drag, despis'd, the chain that heaviest galls!
"My Gods, I thank you: I'm myself, once more—
"A few, black moments—and the deed is o'er.
"And see, by yonder light, my wife appears,
"The wanton smiles, she drops no pleading tears—
"Ah! cease those cursed smiles—thy husband's right
"Shall, from thy spoiler, be reclaim'd this night.
"Yet smile, and to his bed for refuge fly,
"There deprecate my blow, in vain—and die.

[ 17 ]

"Now horror come, and vengeance, and despair;
"Ye slaves of night, that hover in the air!
"That bursting from your black abodes in Hell,
"The list of human mis'ries daily swell;
"That the vile gripe of avarice repay,
"And seize the villain's heart at close of day;
"Or on the ravisher, at midnight steal—
"Come point my dagger with your deadliest steel!
"I feel your pow'r—through ev'ry vein 'tis spread—
"Its thick storm gathers o'er Alphonso's head:
"Soon shall it's fury burst his soul t'appal,
"And your own victim shall the tyrant fall."
Now rising, to the portal swift he flies,
And ev'ry dread impediment defies.
   But hark! within what wild confusion's spread:
A messenger's arriv'd to call for aid.
The loud Conch blows—ah! cease your breath,
'Tis but the solemn, awful knell of death.
Call not your Slaves, from tyranny they're fled:
Not one remains to curse his hated shed:
Not one to hear your momentary praise—
Your flatt'ry cannot on their bosoms seize.

[ 18 ]

Had ye been kind, and treated them as men,
Your kindness they would now have paid again;
But groaning as they are beneath the lash,
And deeply smarting from the barb'rous gash,
Their mouths they open, free from all restraint,
Call to the heart, and your vile usage paint
In rousing accents, manly, firm and bold,
And bid each African the hour behold,
Which, at the worst, if but one moment free,
May grant each son to fall in liberty.
Then recollect thyself, Alphonso, now,
Tho' terror hang upon thy pallid brow,
Tho' on thy call no mangled Slaves attend,
And in this crisis be thyself thy friend.
From this deserted place, with quickness, fly—
Repent thy crimes—go join thy friends and die.
But ah! behold one wretched man thou'st made,
In this, tho' useful, yet too cruel trade.
See where he rushes on, with fiery eye,
And darts along, as meteors through the sky.
Nought stops his passage, but with dread amaze
All give him way, and on him, trembling gaze.

[ 19 ]

Quick to the room, where his lost wife he saw,
Almoona flies and yet forbears to draw
The hidden poniard, lest officious tongues
Might haste t'alarm the author of his wrongs.
He finds the object of his love and hate,
Not in the smiles of a contented state,
As his false hopes had fancy'd her to be,
But in the utmost depth of misery.
Her pensive head upon her hand reclin'd,
And choking sighs express'd her tortur'd mind.
The tears, that for Almoona she had shed,
In slow, large pearls adown her cheeks had fled,
And, as her gaudy cloths they had bedew'd,
For help and pity to her Gods had su'd.
His hasty steps, his panting breath she hears,
And, with astonishment, her head she rears.
She sees her love, she trembles with surprise,
And swift, with rapture, to his bosom flies:
Around his neck her eager arms she throws,
And the full swell of ecstasy she knows.

[ 20 ]

D I G R E S S I O N

   Here let me break the narrative, awhile,
And give Teeaina one heart-flowing smile;
Or, rather, give them both the gushing tear,
That drops, with pity, from a heart sincere.
Unhappy pair! what blessings have ye felt!
Blessings as great as e'er to man were dealt.
This tale is not fictitious, 'tis well known;
Th'unhappy parties long since dead and gone.
Then, if thy heart can fell another's woe,
To their poor mem'ry give one tear to flow.
The purse-proud Christian, whom no feelings grace,
May scorn, perhaps, the black, enslaved race;
But know, that BEING, which has plac'd thee here,
With equal goodness smiles o'er ev'ry sphere,
And makes no diff'rence in the tints of blood—
(For man is man)——It's fav'rites are the good.
And, as its kindness o'er the whole extends,
The easy African it's care befriends.
On him, as well as thee, th'ALMIGHTY pours
The stores of plenty; on him kindly show'rs,

[ 21 ]

Refreshing rains, and boundless gifts bestows.
In ev'ry wood the self-nurs'd Cocoa grows,
The luscious Pine, the Palm, the Pepper-Tree—
Not one of which was e'er beftow'd on thee.
With nature's gifts content, he asks no more,
Nor idly rambles to a foreign shore.
But thy desires, within no bounds confin'd,
Seek ev'ry climate, court each trading-wind
No quarter is neglected, none unknown,—
While happier he each dainty finds at home.
Nay more, thou wretch (forgive th'insulting phrase)
He can, as well as thou, th'ALMIGHTY praise.
Pure if their hearts but be, when they adore
The new-form'd moon—The sun's resistless pow'r,—
The roaring tempest—The refreshing breeze—
Each untaught African a GODHEAD sees:
And to some BEING, great and unconfin'd,
He gives the off'rings of his humble mind.
Dost thou, instructed, the same path pursue?
CHRISTIAN, beware; thy virtues are but few:
And, if thou dar'st Alphonso's crime excuse,
I, from my soul, but with some stronger muse,

[ 22 ]

Might in true colours paint that grov'ling heart,
That from true honor, for vile gold, can part.
Excuse these lines, the tale we'll now pursue,
And bring the wretched pair again to view.
C O N T I N U A T I O N   O F   T H E   N A R R A T I V E

O'ercome with joy—with various thoughts oppress'd
She hangs, awhile upon her husband's breast,
Then presses him to meet her kiss, to bend,
And hold, within his arms, his dearest friend.
But poor Almoona, big with his design,
Does not, as usual, on her neck recline;
Does not, as usual, clasp her to his breast;
Whilst all he feels in tremblings is confess'd.
Her first, great transports o'er, her eyes she lifts,
And their keen, eager gaze she wistly shifts,
From him to draw the sweet return of love—
But all her fond caresses fruitless prove.
She clings still faster, faster flow her tears—
And yet her rapture is not hurt with fears.

[ 23 ]

She thinks her husband's soul, with joy o'ercome,
Distracted wanders from its beating home.
Each sense she strives to reason to recall,
While fondly in her arms she holds her all.
Ah! 'tis in vain—he makes her no return,
But rather struggles from his breast to spurn
The artless energy of weeping love,
Whose sobbing tears a weaker man might move.
Amid this conflict, sweet Teeaina's voice
With broken sighs address'd her bosom's choice.
And thus she spake.
      "My dear Almoona, say,
"Why from me, trembling, dost thou turn away?
"Why dost thou not within thy arms enfold,
"A heart, as warm as that which now I hold ?
"These three long moons, torn from thy cheering sight,
"In sighs I've pass'd each melancholy night;
"Each moment I have curs'd that cruel pow'r,
"That forc'd me from thee, in that dreadful hour,
"When, fainting with despair, thy wretched wife
"Gave up all future happiness in life.

[ 24 ]

"By watchful eyes still guarded closely here,
"I've never had one sight of thee, my dear,
"'Till this bless'd moment unexpected brought
"My lov'd Almoona; thee, to whom each thought,
"Save dire revenge, thy wife has giv'n—
"Whose cries have, surely, reach'd the gates of Heav'n.
"Then, pray thee, speak—oh! ease my trembling heart,
"Perhaps again, this moment, we must part—
"Why dost thou heave the deep, tumultuous sigh?
"Why dost thou stand in speechless agony?
"Oh! speak, my dear Almoona,—cheer my soul,
"Nor let thy tears in silent terror roll.
"Whence is this meeting, fay—how cam'st thou here?
"Thy poor Teeaina surely still is dear?
"Dost thou not love me—Oh! Almoona speak—
"For if thou dost not this fond heart must break."
   "Not love thee"! with impatience he reply'd,
As all her beauties he with transport ey'd.
"Not love thee?—ah! my soul, no longer mine,
"Thou know'st too well, was rivetted to thine:
"Thou know'st too well, my fondness warmer grew,
"The more thy lovely heart thy husband knew:

[ 25 ]

"Thou know'st Teeaina, that, of thee possess'd,
"E'en slav'ry vanish'd from my haughty breast;
"Its cruel stripes with patient smiles I bore,
"Thy love could heal them when their rage was o'er:
"Thou know'st each painful toil I soon forgot,
"When eve recall'd us to our lonely cot;
"That wretchedness itself, when bless'd with thee,
"Was stripp'd of every garb of misery.
"Yes, by our Gods, this solemn truth I swear,
"No husband ever held a wife more dear.
"Long, ere our tyrant gave us leave t'unite,
"I ne'er was happy when debarr'd thy sight;
"Our love, since then, increas'd with ev'ry day,
"'Till from my bosom thou wert torn away.
"Repay'd be he, who by th'atrocious deed
"Has doom'd such excellence, ye Gods! to bleed!
"Few be the blessings of his narrowing life,
"Who from these vengeful arms e'er forc'd my wife!
   "Yes, may our Gods," Teeaina quick replies,
"Who hear the broken-hearted wretches sighs,
"Show'r tenfold horrors on his hated head,
"Who dragg'd me.from my lov'd Almoona's bed!

[ 26 ]

"Oh! grant a woman's just avenging pray'r"—
   "In which," Almoona cries, "I too much share.
"And may I be the instrument they chuse !
"Not one deep, destin'd torment shall he lose.
"But hear Teeaina—We've a charming boy,
"Thy sweet resemblance and his father's joy;
"Him, if my life's prolong'd, I vow to rear
"With all his mother's tenderness and care,
"And give him that fond love I've had for thee,
"Whose smiles, once sweet, I can no longer see.
"No, lost Teeaina, now no more my wife,
"This dagger ends thy miserable life:
"For tho' thou may'st in ev'ry wish be pure,
"My infamy I will no more endure."
This said, forth from its lurking place he drew
And bar'd the dreadful weapon to her view.
She shrieks, and fainting falls into his arms—
His dagger drops—he gazes on her charms,
The melting scene, with pity, he beholds,
And to his bosom the dear wretch he holds.
Her lips he kisses with heart-rending sighs,
And thus aloud distractedly he cries.

[ 27 ]

"Oh! my Teeaina, passion's hapless slave,
"Are there, my love, no means but these to save
"Our honour, by a white-fac'd villain stain'd;
"Of whom I've su'd, to whom I have complain'd,
"Whose justice long a husband has implor'd
"To have his wedded wife to him restor'd.
"Alphonso, can'st thou hear my thund'ring voice?
"Come, spur me on to this my bloody choice,—
"Come, throw thy arms around this graceful form,
"And add new fury to th'assuaging form—
"Rouse me from love—increase the whirlwind's rage,
"And teach me bravely with my thoughts t'engage.
"Oh! beauteous woman! what sweet looks repress
"My purpose—Can I, whilst I thus caress
"My soul's delight, my dear, my greatest joy,
"Whose fondness never did my transports cloy.
"Oh! can I see this once lov'd bosom bleed—
"And yet—I must and will perform the deed.
"What, from pollution tamely take her back?
"No—may I first endure the tort'ring rack,
The glut of malice, and the rage of Hell,
"Which with our tyrant conquerors will dwell!"

[ 28 ]

"And yet—and yet, Teeaina—how I weep—
"Oh! might'st thou thus forever sweetly sleep!
"But see she stirs—her fascinating face
"Almost persuades me to support disgrace—
"But rouse, Almoona, brave the charms of love—
"For all thy fathers ghosts the deed approve.
"Come, vile Alphonso, drag her to thy bed,
"And there her blood I can with firmness shed.
"What, hoa! Alphonso; come, Almoona's here,
"And by thy presence strike thy Slave with fear.
I thank my Gods; I thank my better fate!
"Thy frowns I scorn, and I despise thy hate
"But from my rage, come, screen my injur'd wife—
"I then can do the deed that ends her life."
   As thus he said, the tyrant reach'd the room,
As if abetting her devoted doom.
Within her husband's arms the wife he sees;
And rage and pride on all his passions seize.
"What do'st thou here, vile Slave," the spoiler said,
"And who's the wretch that has his trust betray'd?
"Quick fly thee hence, that Slave thou know'st is mine."
   "Villain 'tis false, her heart was never thine,"

[ 29 ]

Almnoona cried, with loud, terrific roar,
"Nor shall she ever swell thy vices more.
"Dost thou, unmov'd, this dagger's point behold?
"I would not barter it for all thy gold.
"The cry of dreadful war is heard around,
"And to its centre shakes this cursed ground:
"Thy Slaves have, to a man, deserted here,
"And I shall lead them, in their brave career.
"No longer fetter'd, I despise thy soul
"That basely lorded us without controul.
"I call thee to the field—I'll meet thee there—
"And may he fall, who meanly yields to fear!
"Thou'st wrong'd me much; but here my inj'ries cease,
"And she must fall, whose charms have chanc'd to please.
"My dear Teeaina—my lost wife—farewell——
And with our spoiler may all horrors dwell!
This said, from her support his arm he drew,
And aim'd his dagger, while she shriekjng flew
For refuge to her tyrant's loath'd embrace.
   "'Tis as I wish," he cry'd,—"here ends disgrace,
"Alphonso save thee! no, thou sorc'res, no,
"Without a sigh, Almoona strikes the blow."

[ 30 ]

He said, and quick the deathly wound he gave,
And cry'd—"Now, vile Alphonso, strive to save
"That much-lov'd woman from approaching death,
"But see, she draws her last, her parting breath.
"Oh! let me kiss thee, now once more my own—
"I spurn our tyrant's poor, and shrinking frown.
"My dear Teeaina!—oh! be firm my heart!
"Thy precious blood!—ah! is it thus we part!
"And yet 'tis meet—Why dost thou droop with fear,
"Thou wretched thing? There is no dagger near
"For such a being, as the man I see;
"To whom I've stoop'd to bend an husband's knee.
"No; my destroyer, rest secure, and know
"Almoona's soul disdains so mean a blow.
"Touch not that corse; for by our Gods I swear,
"That if thou dost, by piecemeal I will tear
"Thy carcase, should thy blood that field distain,
"Where many of thy kindred will be slain.
"But, if thou treatest it with due respect,
"The sacred laws of war I'll not neglect:
"We'll nobly meet, as warriors ought to meet—
"But may I lay thee prostrate at my feet !

[ 31 ]

"My wrongs, my injur'd wife, thy cruel blows
"Shall arm the keenest of thy mortal foes.
"But 'tis enough—My vengeance scorns delay,
"Then give me room, nor stop me in my way.
"Alphonso,—tyrant—dost thou hear my voice?
"See where lies dead, my youthful bosom's choice.
"Basely thou tor'st her from my happy breast,
"Her blood—her streams of blood will tell the reft.
"Oh! could I stoop to one unmanly deed,
"This moment would my vengeance make thee bleed.
"What! dost thou tremble at this dreadful sight?
"Think'st thou thy ghost with her's shall take its flight?
"Think'st thou her blood with thine shall intermix?
"No; tyrant, when thy bosom I transfix,
"Some heavier weapon my revenge shall chuse,
"Which, with resistless vigor, I will use,
"And bid thy soul, in blackest horrors, go
"To seek the land of never ending woe.
"Nay more, tho' from me ev'ry bliss thou'st torn,
"The mean and skulking work of night I scorn;
"For born a prince, tho' doom'd to be thy Slave,
"I can't forego that pride that nature gave.

[ 32 ]

"Remember then, I'll meet thee in the field,
"Where just revenge shall be my only field.
   He ceas'd, and from the horrid scene he fled,
Where dread remorse uprear'd her ghastly head.
Loud shriek'd the black and omninous birds of night;
Beneath dark clouds the moon had screen'd her light,
Or, for awhile emerging, faintly shone,
As list'ning to the agonizing groan:
Then quick her pallid beams again withdrew,
As o'er the isle the cry of vengeance flew.,
   Almoona now had reach'd th' impatient band,
The bloody weapon reeking in his hand.
With resolution, mix'd with stifled sighs,
"I hope I've not detain'd you long," he cries,
"Tho' ev'ry stop, that bars you in your way,
"I know is irksome. But swift comes the day,
"When on us liberty, once more, shall shine,
"When in these fields we shall no longer pine.
"Why do you view this dagger? does its sight
"Imprint in any of your souls affright?
"Is there among you one who fears to bleed?
"Go to that house and there behold the deed

[ 33 ]

"I've done. Am I alarm'd? say, do I droop?
"No, no. Almoona's heart shall never stoop
"To one, weak fear, 'till all is bravely o'er,
"Then be, perhaps, himself, alas! no more.
"But let us lose no time; the night runs on,
"And much, my friends, ye know there's to be done.
"Now let us wind along from shed to shed,
"And call the suff'rer from his wretched bed;
"Rouse each slav'd African to join yon host,
"Whose welcome fleet is moor'd upon the coast.
"When that is done, my Zemka I will meet,
"And from my soul the dauntless hero greet.
"Methinks I see the youth, methinks I hear
"His sweet, enchanting voice his followers cheer.
"Oh! Zemka, Zemka, when the field we sweep,
"And in our tyrants breasts the keen sword steep,
"How shall we, like superior beings, range,
"And, where 'tis hot, the face of battle change!
"But follow us—and that I'm sure you will—
"And your revenge will have its amplest fill.
"But 'tis enough. Let each his friends convene,
"And, ere 'tis day we'll meet on that broad plain,

[ 34 ]

"Which near the intersecting roads extends,
"Where late expir'd our poor—our murder'd friends.
"Their groans, still heard, our freeborn arms shall raise,
"And bid our swords with ev'ry terror blaze."
This said, to rouse their countrymen they fly,
Hope in each breast and transport in each eye.
   While thus the Africans are ranging wide,
And insurrections gain on ev'ry side,
Alphonso, with wild looks, dishevell'd hair,
And trembling with the rage of wild despair,
Bids the shrill Conch a loud alarm to blow,
To call his Slaves, to march against the foe.
Not one appears; again 'tis louder blown,
But soon he learns that ev'ry Slave is gone.
Distracted now he beats his tortur'd breast,
Terror its gnawing and its only guest.
Then, must'ring up his few dependent friends,
To other Planters for relief he sends;
They join their numbers, and straight take the way,
That leads them safest to th'important day:
On which they'll strive, in vain, the isle to save.
Alas! they march to an unpity'd grave.

[ 35 ]

No train of mourners o'er their ashes bends:
Their servants were their slaves, and not their friends.
   Now the slow, lagging wings of night the dew
Had gently soften'd, and she quicker flew.
Now twilight mounted with a rapid pace,
And joyous broke on ev'ry anxious face;
Her faint, dim light Aurora but foreran,
To indicate her swift approach to man.,
   'Twas at this glorious hour of rising day,
That Zemka and Almoona sped their way,
With some three hundred of their Fellow-Slaves,
Whose vengeful vows had warm'd their brothers graves.
Silent, thro' secret ways, they march along,
Revolving in their minds each crying wrong.
Almoona, hand in hand, with Zemka went,
With frequent grasps, as on their big intent
Their thoughts might dwell. Often he piteous sigh'd,
And gave his heart to her, who by him dy'd.
Zemka, tho' warm'd with ev'ry bold design,
Could not restrain his tears, his sobs confine.
Now to the Gods in silence he would pray;
Then to himself his tender'd heart would fay,

[ 36 ]

"Why do I sigh? my fancy'd griefs are gone,
"When with Almnoona's weigh'd, I find them none.
"Oh! grant, ye Gods! that, in the ebb of life,
"He may not mourn his lost, his injur'd wife!
"Oh! give him, give him ev'ry healing joy,
"And may he live to bless his pratt'ling boy!
"Yes, my dear friend," he loudly then would cry,
"May ev'ry comfort rest in thy sweet boy"!
Almoona hears him, but makes no reply.
His soul, tho' manly, on Teeaina hung;
He saw her faint, he heard her plaintive tongue:
On all their former days of love he dwelt,
And the full weight of misery he felt.
   Now to the bay the band is drawing near,
And glorious does the British flag appear.
Soon as the streaming colours they behold,
Almoona quits his Zemka's friendly hold,
And turning round, with dignity and grace,
(While nobly glow'd each feature of his face)
He bids his follow'rs halt, in troops divide;
And orders who the diff'rent bands must guide.

[ 37 ]

Thus marshall'd to his wish, his friends he eyes,
And pointing to the ships, thus boldly cries.
"My brave, my valiant friends, ye chosen few,
"Who your first breath in happy freedom drew,
"Who tow'rds the goal of freedom now advance
"With rapid strides, I joy to see you glance
"Your eager looks on yon resistless fleet,
"Whose brave commander shall our prowess greet.
"Firm be your courage, temperate, and cool,
"As o'er your heads the mighty thunders roll.
"Be not affrighted at th'effects of war,
"But let retaliation be the star
"To light you thro' the terrifying scene,
"And, if you're wounded, scorn to think of pain.
"Reflect on all your toils, the lash, the hoe,
"And ev'ry other thought you will forego.
"Is there among you one who has not felt
"The heaviest injuries, that e'er were dealt,
"By man to man? Gods! how my soul recoils
"To look on all our weary'd, drudging toils!
"How, at the sound of man, feel I my blood
"Run wild thro' ev'ry vein! Its furious flood

[ 38 ]

"Shall roll impetuous on from foe to foe,
"Till my revenge is sated with its blow.
"Are we not fellow-men, form'd in one mould,
"Tho' we like beasts have been expos'd and sold ?
"Are they of nobler make? Their limbs more strong?
"And act they always right, we always wrong?
"Have they more senses? are their passions less?
"Can they their feelings more than we express?,
   "But 'tis enough—They've had their cruel day,
"'Tis now our turn: I'll bravely lead the way,
"With you in ev'ry peril I will share,
"And teach you to despise the ills of war.
"Yes, on this day, before you here I swear,
"My soul shall never feel the breath of fear.
"Let the swift, death-wing'd bullets fly around;
"Let me be cover'd o'er with many a wound;
"Yet, while this arm th'avenging sword can wield,
"I never will desert the dubious field,
"Till our tormentors stain the bloody shore,
"And my destroyer be in life no more;
"'Till the great shout of vict'ry glad my soul,
"And loud huzzas along the island roll.

[ 39 ]

"But yet, if there should be amongst us those,
"Who've never felt their kinder masters blows,
"Let them desert our cause; let them forbear
"Against their friends to point the fatal spear.
"If there be such, beseech you, quickly fly,
"Go join the Spanish troops, there rather die;
"If one kind, friendly act you can repay,
"Than hail the triumphs of this glorious day.
"Had my fell tyrant us'd me as a man,
"I would have scorn'd to aid our noble plan;
"For him each danger should my soul have brav'd,
"And, at all risks, his life I would have sav'd.
"Yes, my dear friends, this body should have been,
"Long as my limbs had strength, Alphonso's screen.,
   "But hark the martial drums to battle beat,
"And loudly roar the thunders of the fleet.
"Roar on! with horror shake the trembling isle!
"And, oh! ye Gods! on the vast ruin smile!
"Point ev'ry engine to its destin'd place,
"And the swift track of fatal carnage trace!
"Thro' ev'ry rank confusion quickly spread!
"Bid panic terror raise its ghastly head!

[ 40 ]

"Enervate ev'ry hand! each heart appal!
"And bid our tyrants in the slaughter fall!
"And, oh! ye pitying pow'rs! these bands survey!
"Keen be their strokes! impetuous be their way!
"Firm be their courage, manly, bold and strong!
"And may they be repaid for ev'ry wrong!
"Now brother warriors, whom I gladly greet
"Once more as freemen (for as such we meet)
"Let us, with quickest speed and ardor, haste
"The luscious cup of liberty to taste;
"It hangs suspended from the arch of Heav'n,
"And to our reach on yonder shore 'tis giv'n.
"Where, while the gift with rapt'rous glow we seize,
"Our swords a lasting monument shall raise,
"To teach the sons of Europe 'tis in vain
"T'endear the African to merc'less pain.
"But come, my friends, the east begins to glow,
"And soon the sun shall smile on ev'ry blow.
"Let us embrace, and all our Gods adore—
"Now march we forward to th'approaching shore."
   This said, with courage darting from his eyes,
And stimulated soul, Almoona flies.

[ 41 ]

The brave band follow with increasing speed;
To urge them faster on there is no need.
They pant for battle, for revenge they thirst,
And each bold African would be the first
T'attack the foe, to rout the adverse wing;
The fall of which he may hereafter sing.
And leaving now the hills and woods behind,
Onwards they rush, and, swifter than the wind,
O'er each opposing fence they nimbly bound,
And safely gain the wish'd-for, open ground.
They see the English form along the beach,
Their line within a few, short minutes reach.
The glorious sight Almoona's heart elates,
Which for the battle, with impatience, beats.
As on he hastes some officers advance,
On whom he casts a glad, but martial glance.
They bid him stop, he instantly obeys,
And thus, with intrepidity, he says.
"Seek ye to know what is our errand here,
"Or why, unbidden, we approach so near?
"Be this short tale enough—We're injur'd men,
"Who fly from slav'ry, tortures, whips and pain;

[ 42 ]

"Who come, unask'd, to give our utmost might,
"And help you freely in th'approaching fight.
"But lead me to your chief, if not too bold,
"To him I will, at large, our cause unfold.
"Swift be your office, for we long to join
"The warlike ardor of your marshal'd line."
He ceas'd, and straight an officer reply'd,
"Brave man thy wishes shall not be deny'd.
"Wait here a moment 'till I've seen our chief,
"Thy warm suspension soon shall have relief."
Almoona bow'd—The officers retir'd,
And on their general waited, as desir'd.
To him (brave D'OILEY who commanded there)
They quick relate Almoona's earnest pray'r;
Describe th'emotions of his active zeal,
And what himself and his brave followers feel.
He lists attentive to the brief report,
And, pitying men of cruelty the sport,
Bids them approach, tho' swiftly climbs the day,
And Sol begins to dart his sultriest ray.
In this suspense Almoona's soul beat fast,
And gave a thought to what had lately past;

[ 43 ]

Teeaina's image still was hanging there,
And from his eyes it forc'd a silent tear.
Zemka, with fondest looks, beheld his friend,
And pray'd the heart-felt conflict soon might end.
And soon it will—The officers command
Almoona to conduct th'intrepid band.
"Our leader waits impatiently to see
"Those heroes who will fight for liberty."
He gives the welcome word: his friends obey,
And march in solemn, but in bold aray.
Now to the general come they halt once more,
And view his army lining all the shore.
Almoona, with an unexpected ease,
And dignity, that ev'ry heart might please,
Advances some few steps, salutes the chief,
And smothers, for awhile, each latent grief.
   "Whence or who art thou, say," the general cries,
While with astonishment the Slave he eyes.
"What are thy injuries? thy wrongs declare;
"And why amid thy boldness starts the tear?
"Who are thy followers? thy wishes what?
"Be not one subject of thy tale forgot."

[ 44 ]

"For, tho' a soldier, I've a heart to feel,
"And thy distresses 'twill, with pleasure, heal.
"Then speak out freely, I'll to all attend
"Thy portliness has claim'd me for thy friend."
Straight from a graceful bend Almoona rose
Superior to his state; above his woes.
And in an attitude, that all express'd,
The British general he thus address'd.
   "Ah! ask me not from whence these tributes flow,
"Time will not let you all my mis'ries know.
"In me, most noble leader, now you see
"A man reduc'd to meanest slavery:
"In these the victims of unnumber'd woes,
"Who long have groan'd beneath severest blows:
"Nay more if your great, feeling soul can beat,
"And, for a moment, stop the battle's heat,
"In me, an injur'd prince you here behold,
"Who some years past was barter'd for vile gold.
"First from my kindred torn; then hither brought,
"Where, like the basest wretch, the hands have wrought.
"Once in my native region I, with lustre, shone,
"No friendlier acts, than mine, were ever done.

[ 45 ]

"Yet think not, chieftain, that I court applause,
"Or idly wish to palliate our cause:
"It needs no gloss of words, no artful tongues—
"Our scars alone would manifest our wrongs:
"These shoulders, were they bare, would tell a tale,
"At which the meanest of your men would rail.
"But now my spirit rous'd, (no tort'rer near)
"Vents, what it feels, to your indulgent ear.
"I have, within my soul, seeds of that pride,
"Which, with superior men, will'e'er reside.
"And since one glorious hour, at length, I hold,
"Its sentiments exulting I unfold.
"And yet, with all its pride, my harrow'd heart
"The deadliest of its stings must here impart.
"The stripes of cruelty I e'er withstood,
"For ev'ry ill I had a sov'reign good,
"Save one, which love like mine could not endure,
"For which, alas! there was one only cure.
"Behold this dagger—on its blade now rests
"Such blood as never flow'd from human breasts—
"It is my wife's—who yet unbury'd lies.
"Methinks I see her tears—I hear her cries—

[ 46 ]

"Ah! dreadful recollection—horrid thought—
"But with my infamy my soul was fraught,
"When to my injur'd love the stroke I gave,
"The only means that could my honor save.
"Three happy years I bless'd each closing day,
"When in my bosom my Teeaina lay.
"My aching limbs, that nurs'd the juicy cane,
"Were recompens'd for ev'ry drudging pain;
"For, near her plac'd, I eas'd her stated toils,
"And she repaid me with the sweetest smiles;
"And at each eve, no cruel driver near,
"We felt each comfort and we knew no fear.
"I took her to my arms, I kiss'd my love,
"And the great Gods did ev'ry deed approve.
"But bless'd, or rather curs'd with beauties rare,
"Alphonso wish'd in my delights to share—
"He tore her from me—took her to his bed,
"And ev'ry future hope, but vengeance, fled.
"In part that's satisfy'd; but there remains
"A stroke that will relieve my bitter'st pains.
"My wife from base pollution I have freed;
"Within her breast I've seen this dagger bleed—"

[ 47 ]

"I stabb'd my soul's delight—I saw her die
"Deliver'd from her hated misery—
"I kiss'd her pallid lips—I shed a tear—
"And to my bosom press'd her corse still dear—
"I saw the parting, bleeding tide of life—
"And to the Gods I gave my murder'd wife.
"This deed an injur'd husband's right has claim'd,
"Yet, when the stab was giv'n, 'twas love that aim'd.
"But now a nobler prospect nerves my arm,
"And brightest hopes my tortur'd bosom warm.
"Your troops with pleasure fill my eager eyes,
"And from this moment I forget my sighs.
"A warrior now, you'll find me cool and brave;
"Not one base subterfuge my life shall save;
"Not one impending danger shall affright
"My steady soul, or make me shun the fight.
"You cannot point out that vast load of toil,
"However weighty, which I will not soil.
"Bid me be rang'd, where pours the storm of death,
"Undaunted I will meet its fiery breath
"Bid me advance the foremost of the line,
"Where strongest ranks and obstacles combine

[ 48 ]

"To stop the progress of this noble host,
"I'll bravely fall, or gain th'appointed post.
"Bereft of ev'ry hope of future joy,
"I'll mount the breach, dread batt'ries destroy,
"And with th'impatient, injur'd band I lead,
"O'er prostrate foes 'midst clashing horrors tread.
"These friends, brave chief, are faithful, daring, bold,
"Tho' doom'd to slav'ry for dirty gold
"There's not among them one, who will betray
"Your hopes or mine on this most glorious day.
"As you're a Briton—as you come from where,
"Bright freedom does her silver standard rear,
"You will applaud their deeds—I know you will.
"For tho' in discipline they've little skill,
"Tho' not instructed to direct the roar
"That pours sulphureous from the deathly bore;
"The massive spear or sabre they can wield,
"And deal destrution o'er th' ensanguin'd field.
"Then give us arms—your orders we'll obey;
"And I will shew my friends the noble way
"To conquest, freedom and immortal fame.
"Not one shall merit your reproach or blame.

[ 49 ]

" Not one is here, to whom you'll not bestow
"Those thanks, that from a gen'rous heart can flow."
   Almoona ceas'd, and waited his reply
With hope impatient, and with glist'ning eye.
That prepossession, which had claim'd his ear,
To admiration now had warm'd the tear
Which to Almoona's fate (from whom was fled
All happiness in life) the chief had shed.
He gaz'd attentive on the princely slave,
And to his wishes thus his answer gave.,
   "Unhappy man! what anguish hast thou known,
"In doing what thy wretched heart has done!
"I wish 'twere in my pow'r its wounds to heal—
"Alas! I only can thy sorrows feel.
"But, if 'twill glad thee to conduct this band,
"I give thee an unlimited command
"To guide them where my orders shall direct;
"And these, I'm confident, thou'lt not neglect.
"I fix your present station in the rear,
"Where we can arm you, as the foe draws near:
"From thence to either wing you shall divide,
"Which, wide extending, will your numbers hide.

[ 50 ]

"Be cool, Almoona, and with patience wait,
"'Till some discharges shall allow your fate
"In not unequal balance to be weigh'd;
"'Till then 'twould be imprudent to be try'd.
"But, tho' your wrongs may urge you to the war,
"Let not revenge be hurry'd on too far.
"You've join'd my troops, are under my command,
"And, when I order, you must make a stand;
"Desist from slaughter, sheath the bloody sword,
"And be obedient at the given word.
"We and the Spaniards fight like gen'rous men,
"And, when the war is o'er, are friends again.
"No rooted malice rankles in our breasts;
"That hellish thought, my friend, my soul detests.
"But, lifted in our country's cause, we must,
"When order'd, faithfully fulfill our trust.
"War is too dreadful, of itself, to need
"One single spur, to make more wretches bleed.
"These are my sentiments, and this my plan;
"The greatest foe I have is still a man;
"My fellow-creature—born, like me, to taste
"Whatever good the will of Heav'n has plac'd

[ 51 ]

"Within his reach—beneath its care to move;
"Bless'd, if deserving, with its tender'st love.
"When him I meet, my country to defend,
"I meet a public foe, but private friend.
"I'll use all arts to foil him in the field,
"All social offices I'll, elsewhere, yield:
"True to my trust, I'll conquer, if I can,
"And when he's conquer'd treat him as a man.
"You've heard my wishes, see they be obey'd,
"And let me not, Almoona, be betray'd.
"Due spirit leads us in the battle's heat,
"Compassion guides us, when our foes retreat.
"Farewell 'till this day's business be done,
"Which to our wishes will, I hope, be won."
   Almoona bows assent; his honor's fir'd;
And savage vengeance is no more desir'd.
He bids his follow'rs march, they gain the rear,
Where each is arm'd, and ignorant of fear,
Waits, with impatience, for th'approaching fight,
And views his enemies with fierce delight.
   And now the charge begins: now cannons roar,
And with their thunders shake the trembling shore:

[ 52 ]

Now the contending armies vollies pour,
And deaths unnumber'd fly in ev'ry show'r.
Destruction swift rebounds from side to side,
And swells, incessantly, the purple tide:
From ev'ry part it flows—Loud drums, in vain,
Strive to o'erpow'r the horrors of the plain.
The shrieks of death and shouts of triumph blend,
Reach the blue mountains and the welkin rend.
Firm as a rock, that braves the whirlwind's rage,
Almoona sees the diff'rent troops engage;
The deathly tempest of the field he hears
Louder and louder swell; yet still he bears
His steady looks unmov'd, which seem to say,
"How nobly spreads the tumult of the day!
"This uproar wild is fashion'd to my soul,
"And, pleas'd, it hears these mighty thunders roll."
While thus the battle warms, and all around
Redoubles the reverberating sound,
From rank to rank he goes: his words inspire
Their breasts with thirst of fame; they catch his fire,
And as the tyger, with rapacious eyes
The near approaches of his victim spies

[ 53 ]

And fiercely couching twists his tale with joy,
Eager to make a spring and to destroy,
So they, with brandish'd swords, their looks elate
Dart on the Spaniards, and prepare their fate.
Along the line Almoona dauntless flies,
Till his keen search his hated rival 'spies.
Fresh vigor nerves his arm: he marks the place,
And longs to end or heighten his disgrace.
"I vow before the Gods," his passions cry,
"That either I, or thou this day shall die."
Then straight returning to his friends, who wait
From death or victory to meet their fate,
Thus bids them be prepar'd.
         "The hour is near
"We long have wish'd; the glorious moment's here.
"The Spaniards, our base tyrants, seem to lag,
"And onward moves the steady British flag.
"Our gen'ral shortly will our swords demand,
"Then be ye ready for the blest command;
"And when 'tis given—But your looks proclaim
"'Tis needless to exhort the sons of fame.

[ 54 ]

"Oh! haste ye then, your welcome orders bring,
"And on your foes, like lions, we will spring.
"But yet, forbid unbridled hate should swell
"In any breast, or our revenge impell,
"(However great the wrongs that form this plan)
"To cruel acts, unworthy of a man.
"No: let us firmly on the Spaniards rush,
"But let us not before the gen'ral blush.
"Let bravery, and not blind fury guide
"The injured Africans resistless tide.
"Let our keen swords, that glitter in the storm,
"Actions of valour, not of rage perform.
"At least mine shall. Alphonso's on the right:
"Him will I meet, with him I'll fairly fight,
"And give him ev'ry chance. No lurking scheme
"Shall lessen his disgrace, or wound my fame.
"No. Dearly as I lov'd my soul's delight,
"Now lost forever to my longing sight,
"I, e'en to him, would rather yield my life,
"Than by a coward's art revenge my wife."
   While thus he speaks, an officer arrives,
And his directions to Almoona gives.

[ 55 ]

He bids him march; and where the foe retires,
Or where confusion scatters weaken'd fires,
To make an onset. Now the friends divide,
And swiftly stretch along on either side.
Zemka the left, Almoona takes the right,
Where soon he hopes to gratify his sight.
And now, unable to support the heat,
The Spaniards, slack'ning, tow'rds the fields retreat.
Now, rushing onward to compleat the rout,
Almnoona's friends with wild exultance shout,
And quickly with their tyrants furious meet,
And hand to hand the battle they repeat.
Their glitt'ring swords with force resistless flame,
And many a Spaniard bites the dust with shame.
In flight, at length, they strive their lives to save,
But strive in vain. Unsated is the Slave;
His cruel usage is not yet repaid,
Nor blunted yet is the avenging blade.
They quit the plain, thro' hidden paths they fly,
There are o'ertaken—feebly fight—and die.
Almoona, still on one firm purpose bent,
Among the reft pursues; on him intent,

[ 56 ]

Whom most he wishes, like a man, t'engage,
With open courage, not with brutal rage.
His eagerness unusual speed supplies:
He reaches him, and thus he nobly cries.
"Alphonso, turn, the wrong'd Almoona's here,
"Compose thyself; forget this idle fear;
"Be cool, as is thy foe, thyself defend,
"And may the Gods the justest cause befriend!"
He turn'd and wish'd to speak. "No parleying now,"
The injur'd widower cries, "I've made a vow,
"If kinder fate should throw thee in my way,
"That either thou or I should fall this day.
"Think on my woes—Think on that cursed bed,
"To which, by force, my heart-lov'd wife was led—
"Think of the dreadful sight thou'st lately seen—
"To thy black soul recall the horrid scene—
"But let all altercation hence be mute,
"And with our swords let's finish the dispute.
"Come fight thy best, no quarter do I crave;
"And rouse thy soul—thou cop'st but with thy Slave.
"Call forth thy vengeance, pour it on my head,
"Who from thy tyranny have meanly fled.

[ 57 ]

"With courage nerve thy arm; regain thy breath;
"And send Almoona to the shades of death.
"Be but as valiant, as thy heart is base,
"And thou wilt triumph soon in my disgrace.
   He ceas'd, and some few paces he retir'd,
His soul with calm retaliation fir'd.
His keen reproaches rous'd Alphonso's pride,
He scorns to hear him insolently chide,
And fays, "How dar'st thou thus thy master treat,
"Or these insulting words, base wretch, repeat?
"Fell murder'r! think who now by thee lies dead,
"And up to justice give thy guilty head."
"Yes, so I will, if thou shalt victor prove,"
He quick replies, "I'll give it to my love.
"A murd'rer I! I scorn the horrid sound:
"On thee let that detested name rebound.
"My master thou! recall th'insulting phrase,
"Act like a man, and merit ev'n my praise.
"For, if thou conquer'st, I will call the brave.
"No more—Now strive thy wretched life to save,
"For by the Gods, who injuries requite,
"Thy ghost, or mine, shall seek eternal night.

[ 58 ]

   Now springing forward with a dauntless heart,
While from his eyes contending passions dart,
He meets Alphonso's sword, the clash he hears—
The sound is more than music to his ears.
Now hand to hand with vigor they engage,
One arm'd with coolness, one with haughtiest rage.
And now they push; now catch the falling blow,
Their watchful eyes still fasten'd on the foe.
The direful stroke to shun sometimes they bend;
Sometimes annoy; sometimes themselves defend.
Each aim is parry'd with a dext'rous skill,
And hopes and doubts, by turns, their bosoms fill.
But now Almoona, on his guard awhile,
Provokes Alphonso to exhausting toil;
And now recov'ring breath and strength and life,
Resolves, at once, to end the dubious strife.
Then, straining ev'ry nerve, his fatal hand
Aims his last blow, and lays him on the sand.
Forth from his breast the bloody torrent flies,
And deathly dimness darks his closing eyes.
"'Tis done, great Gods! the bloody deed is o'er,"
The victor cries, "and I exult no more.

[ 59 ]

"Hear me, Alphonso, if thou yet canst hear,
"Hadst thou attended to a husband's pray'r,
"I had not been the wretch I'm doom'd to be,
"Drooping beneath a load of misery.
"Oh! my belov'd, here our destroyer lies,
"In agonies he breathes his last—he dies.
"I consecrate this blow to thy blest shade,
"And for my injuries I'm amply paid.
"My soul no mean indignities shall shew,
"Alphonso has in me a gen'rous foe."
   As thus he speaks, Alphonso's feeble eyes
Are tow'rds him rais'd, and with convulsive sighs
He gazes on him, shakes his head, and prays,
And, stretching out his hand, thus faintly fays.,
   "Ah! wrong'd Almoona, whither have I stray'd?
"My crimes are now with frightful looks array'd.
"The injuries, I long to thee have dealt,
With deep remorse, are at this moment felt
When thy just cause beholds my wretched end.
Oh! if thy feelings can to pity bend,
"(And from thy looks methinks they will) forgive
"A wretched man, who has not long to live.

[ 60 ]

"Oh! pray thee do not curse thy tyrant now,
"Nor offer up to Heav'n one crying vow,
That may before its throne be heard—Implore
"For mercy—I can injure thee no more.
"Say, do'st thou pardon me, thou injur'd man?"
   "Yes, yes I do" (while tears of anguish ran
Fast down his cheeks) he eagerly reply'd;
(Nor did he strive his soften'd soul to hide,
Which sweet compassion warm'd, as on his knees
He wafted o'er his face the gather'd breeze.)
"May Heav'n forgive thee too—Beyond the grave
"Revenge should ne'er be carry'd by the brave."
   "Oh! I have wrong'd him much—in mercy spare
"The errors of my life—oh! hear my pray'r.
"Give me thy hand—oh! ease this racking pain—
"Dost thou forgive?—repeat the sound again."
   "Yes, from my very soul," he cry'd, " I do,"
While to his lips his hand Alphonso drew,
And said, "be this the kiss of peace—the seal—
"Oh! let it all our mortal hatred heal!
"But ah! that pang; Forgiving goodness spare
"My trembling soul, and save it from despair!

[ 61 ]

"Assist me, all ye pitying pow'rs above,
"And sue for mercy from the God you love!—
"Ah! there again!—The struggle's at an end—
"Farewell, Almoona—now, in death, my friend."
   He ceas'd; he clos'd his eyes; he dropp'd his head,
And fwell'd the number of th' unhappy dead.,
   The dreadful business o'er; his victim slain;
Almoona's thoughts, in bitterness, complain
That e'er his wrongs had spurr'd him to the deed,
That e'er their cries had made their author bleed.
He views his corpse, and o'er it weeping stands;
Then tow'rds the skies he stretches out his hands;
Begins to pray; when deeply 'cross his heart
The injuries of his wife resistless dart.
Love, anguish, pity, horror rule by turns,
And his wild bosom with the conflict burns.
His bloody sword—Alphonso's dying pray'r—
His promis'd pardon, and the suppliant air
Which begg'd that pardon, his rack'd soul assail,
And borne down by them all his spirits fail.
In this distress the warring day is o'er,
And orders bid the troops pursue no more.

[ 62 ]

He hears the call, and rushing from the scene,
Wildly he flies and meets the conquering train.
He sees his Zemka with success elate,
Who springs with eagerness to learn his fate;
He sees his bloody sword, his nerveless frame,
And trembling for his tale, he fears his shame.
   "Ah! my Almoona, whence this tremor? say,
"Hast thou been foil'd on this important day?
"Is curs'd Alphonso from thy vengeance fled"—
   "No, Zemka, no; he's number'd with the dead.
"With this I pierc'd his breast—The deed is o'er—
"Come let us quit this horrid, bloody shore.
"My vengeance is at rest—Hence let us fly
"Once more to see my love, and kiss my boy."
   "Is this Almoona?" Zemka quick replies
(As keenest courage flashes from his eyes)
"Is this my friend, who warm'd our souls to war!
"Come rouse thyself, be still our leading star.
"We claim the leader's thanks for what we've done—
"Regain thy manly looks, and lead us on.
   "This said, without attending to his sigh,
He seiz'd his hand, nor waited a reply,

[ 63 ]

But marching boldly, sensible to fame,
Into the presence of the gen'ral came.
Their deeds of valor he already knows,
And on them thus his praises he bestows.
   "Welcome, Almoona, welcome from the fight,
"Welcome, are all, who've put the foe to flight.
"Your vengeance, I'm inform'd, has been in bounds,
"More honor, therefore, on your feats redounds.
"Receive my thanks, and rest assur'd, my friends,
"That he'll reward you, who your deeds commends.
"Thou and thy followers are henceforth free—
"You've nobly fought, and claim your liberty.
"When peace shall all our warring broils compose,
"And final conquest has disarm'd our foes,
"Then will I portion out some small estate,
"Where, from the world, thy sorrows may retreat.
"Nor shall thy friends neglected long remain,
"Of our forgetfulness shall none complain.
"Retire ye now, refreshment you must need
"And other helps, for many of you bleed."
   Almoona bow'd his thanks with drooping head,
And thus reply'd,—"My wife, you know, is dead,

[ 64 ]

"And our late master is in life no more—
"I laid him breathless on the fatal shore.
"But, on my word, in open war I fought,
"And, as you wish'd, no savage blow I sought.
"The dreadful purpose of my soul's fulfill'd—
"My wife and tyrant by these hands are kill'd—
"Her still I love, and him, in death, forgave—
"What now is wanting but a peaceful grave?
"Yet take our thanks for what you have design'd,
"And may you to my friends be ever kind!
"With me heart-rending thoughts alone must dwell—
"To ev'ry joy I bid a long farewell."
   He paus'd awhile, with what he felt oppress'd,
And clasp'd his hands upon his tortur'd breast.
Then wistly looking round with streaming eyes,
He thus address'd their hearts 'midst broken sighs.
   "From my misfortunes learn, ye Whites, to know
"When to chastise, and when to spare the blow.
"Learn too that Heav'n, in goodness unconfin'd,
"Deals out impartial blessings to mankind:
"Bids nature mould all colours in one frame,
"Our virtues, passions, feelings still the same.

[ 65 ]

"If bless'd instructions truths to you impart,
"Whose rays on ruder countries do not dart,
"Pity our ignorance—but never say,
"From what we once have known, we're gone astray!
"If ye are richer, let your riches be
"The source of joy and not of misery!
"And if my countrymen must still be brought,
"From their own shores, and here like beasts be bought,
"Pray ye! reflect that they are men like you,
"And let humanity be kept in view!
"Add not new rigors to their wretched state,
"Nor let them be the objects of your hate.
"Let some compassion o'er their labours smile,
"And comforts cheer them in the weary'd toil.
"'Tis dreadful, did you, by experience, know,
"To drudge, and still expect the merc'less blow.
"'Tis sure enough to see them pine away
"Amid the sultry vapours of the day,
"Without inflicting punishments severe,
"Almost beyond the strength of man to bear!
"Drag not their wives to your detested beds,
"Nor swell the groans that haunt their dreary sheds.

[ 66 ]

"Bring up their children with a pious care,
"And let them, with you, in life's comforts share.
"Oh! may they never know the pangs I feel!
"Which even lenient time must never heal!
"From my sad, sorrowing soul sweet peace is fled,
"And with my wife all future hope is dead."
   Grief chok'd his voice—with folded arms he bent,
And tow'rds his widow'd cottage slowly went.
Companion gaz'd, with tear-distilling eyes,
And with his sorrows mix'd her piteous sighs.
THE END.